
https://www.bonedo.de/artikel/einzelansicht/native-instruments-traktor-evolution-der-dj-software.html



Native Instruments Traktor: Evolution der DJ-Software
A look back at two decades of digital DJ culture
von Mijk van Dijk16.11.2018195

Native Instruments Traktor is next to Serato the most important professional DJ software. Whether mixing only with the laptop, with DVS support or your own highly specialized controllers: Traktor has decisively shaped the image of the digital DJ, promoted and innovations such as loops, Beatjump, remix decks, STEM decks and last but not least the infamous Sync button introduced to the DJ culture.

Within 20 years, the Berlin-based software company has grown from a small start-up to a global player and has nevertheless been able to maintain its Kreuzberg down-to-earth nature.

On the occasion of the release of Traktor Pro 3 and the also brand new controllers Kontrol S4 MK3 and Kontrol S2 MK3 we met the person at NI, who accompanied Traktor from the beginning: Traktor Product Owner Friedemann Becker. A look back at two decades of digital DJing with some very interesting insights behind the scenes.


Tractor Product Owner Friedemann Becker reviews 20 years of tractor history (Image: Mijk van Dijk)

Content:

MJ Studio (1998) - "Tractor, I am your father"
Friedemann Becker and Native Instruments
Traktor DJ Studio (2001) - The first "real" tractor
teething problems
Traktor: Embedded Player
Traktor DJ Studio 2 (October 2002) - Very close to the user
Traktor DJ Studio 2.5 (September 2003) - Beatjump and Key Control
In Sync: Tractor in many areas pioneer of digital DJing
Traktor DJ Studio 2.6 (November 2004) The DJ studio with vinyl control
Controllerism
Tractor 3 (September 2005) - Four decks and more
Traktor Scratch (January 2007): Separate ways
Pioneer work - Tractor Pro (October 2008) - Much in the beginning
Traktor Pro 2 (April 2011) - Everything is so colorful here
Traktor Pro 2.5 (March 2012) - Remixes with the power of the four
Traktor wie Accusonus Software Regroover?
The last years of tractor 2
MJ Studio (1998) - "Tractor, I am your father"
In 1994, the Fraunhofer Institute introduced the MP3 standard, a very low-loss compression method, in order to send music files as efficiently as possible through the still young and rather slow Internet. Already four years later, and long before the first iPod was released in 2001, the small three-headed company d-lusion interactive media developed the first virtual DJ software for PCs, in which MP3s could be mixed with two players and adjusted in tempo. MJ Studio already offered a three-band equalizer, playlists with ID3 support, a preview function, mouse-scratching and even a beater recognition. Incidentally, two of the former d-lusion founders have now founded the well-known language learning company Babbel. And who wants to dive even in the early days of digital hanging up:The Uropa of all DJ software can still be downloaded for free.


Traktor 3's great-grandfather: MJ Studio by d-lusion in 1998. That's how digital launches began 20 years ago. (Image: with permission of Native Instruments)

Friedemann Becker joined Native Instruments in 2000:
"As a trained physicist, I used Reactor's precursor generator early on to build all sorts of things that had more to do with metrology than music. You had all kinds of mathematical functions in the digital modular system, could feed in electrical currents and do much more with it than just sound. I then approached Native Instruments during the 1999 Frankfurt Music Fair. My first job was reactor community manager, so I set up the reactor user library. "

The company had just established a solid name in the studio scene with innovative software synths like Reaktor and the first plug-in versions of legendary hardware keyboards such as Pro-52 (Sequential Circuits Prophet-5) and B4 (Hammond B3). Now Berlin wanted to conquer the DJ area. They were looking for developers, came across the company d-lusion and their product MJ Studio. Becker gives an insight into the Stone Age of digital laying on:

"At that time, DJing on the computer looked like you could mix two instances of Winamp with a crossfader plug-in on a desktop machine. That was not yet pitchbar and everything had to be operated via mouse and key commands. At that time there were no DJs specialized in controllers and sound cards. MJ Studio was also still very basic in terms of functionality, but at least pitchable that DJs in the computer could adjust the tracks, was a real quantum leap.

We were then able to convince the d-lusion developers to come to us and bring their know-how and their IP to us. The Beatgrid was one of the first things we put a lot of energy into making it reliable and marketable, because that's the prerequisite for a satisfying sync functionality. This beat detection was - like many great instruments at NI - also developed in Reaktor and later ported to C ++ and patented. This is one of the technical contributions that I myself have contributed to tractor over the years as a physicist. "


Traktor Product Owner Friedemann Becker in the big Bonedo interview (Image: Mijk van Dijk)

Traktor DJ Studio (2001) - The first "real" tractor
So in 2001 Traktor DJ Studio was developed as a further development of MJ Studio with Friedemann Becker as project manager.

"The first thing we did was redesign the surface. The interaction with the music should become more visible, tangible and therefore more immediate than just pressing start and stop. This was the waveform display where you could quickly select and scratch a particular position with the mouse, much like a vinyl record. Added to this was a comfortable browser and a completely new design, because Native Instruments has always defined itself and set it apart. Also important was an NI-typical filter, also inspired by the then very popular Allen & Heath Xone: 92 console and its filter-mixing capabilities long before Pioneer and the other companies introduced filters in their mixers. Nevertheless, the design was still very playful, many round elements, later we have become so much sober. But there was already a master clock and the phase meter, which represents the synchronicity of the two decks.

It was also important to us to make the software controllable by a controller. That's why we made the thing MIDI-capable to connect Traktor to General Purpose MIDI controllers such as Doepfer Pocket Control and Behringer BCF-2000. It was one of Tractor's first steps to be taken seriously by professional DJs who go on stage and really want to screw in there. But some of our first "evangelists" were also pure "mouse DJs", as they used to play in Berlin's WMF club. Another user of the first hour was the Frankfurt Drum 'n' Bass producer Kabuki, who already put on the Fusion-Festival 2001 with the first version of Traktor.

Of course we spared no effort and expense, our Bonedo author colleague Manuela Krause, to make a statement

"I used the computer from the beginning and at first even dragged my iMac G3 into the WMF. That's when I installed one of the first MP3 softwares:  Tactile 12000 . Hang up and mix with the mouse! That was totally filthy. Went really only with fast crossfade or track by track. Then a buddy lent me his laptop with a tractor for a trip to Tel Aviv and I was absolutely thrilled! I then voluntarily bought a PC laptop and put my fat Mac in the corner!

Funny were the reactions of the colleagues: I was not "just a woman" behind the deck, but have also hung up with the computer. The other DJs did not take that seriously at first. They thought that was totally funny, but not professional. The only one I got positive feedback from was Electric Indigo (here in Gear Chat) who heard and saw me in Sarajevo on a rave!

I thought it was fantastic to use the first two tractor versions! The beatmixing with the mousepad and the keys went quite rhythmically and easily from the hand. The nice thing: At that time Traktor was still very minimalistic, reduced to the essentials and yet you could really rock the floor with it, if you had the right music at the right time. "


Bonedo author Manou was one of the first DJs to hang out with the tractor and laptop in the trendy clubs. (Image: by courtesy of Manuela Krause)

teething problems
"Traktor was not a hype at the beginning. The idea of ​​bringing DJ software to the market was definitely very courageous, "concludes Becker.

"The first users were people who wanted a lay-up experience for little money at home, especially since only a little music at all was purely digital. There was a parallel development of MP3 format and DJ software, so at the beginning we also had a function for CD playback. At the beginning we were not taken seriously by the professional DJs. A computer in the DJ Booth was quite daring at the beginning of the thirties. There was not even Ableton back then. "

At that time, virtual instruments were more popular than DJ software because the computer in the studio was not a foreign object. In general, there were many compromises anyway. Due to the comparatively small amount of memory in computers, many MP3s still had low resolutions like 128 kBit and then there was also the question of where the MP3 actually came from. In the time before iTunes and Beatport, a lot of music got to the computers via Napster and other semi-legal sources. But the technical development and the time played as in the development of native plug-ins of the Berlin software company in the hands.


Traktor DJ Studio was the first incarnation of Traktor and the beginning of a success story for DJ software (Image courtesy of Native Instruments)

Embedded Player
Traktor DJ Studio was a pure PC software, but was not limited to computers. In 2002, in cooperation with Sony Records, on several Dream Dance compilations as well as on the Kai Tracid album "Trance & Acid " there was an additional Traktor DJ mix, which was available as a small compact mix file on the CD and accessed the audio tracks of the CD , This was playable on the Windows PC with the included tractor player or of course the tractor DJ Studio full version. The author of these lines also had the honor at the end of 2001, with the help and guidance of Friedemann Becker personally for his album "Everyground"To create such a mix. With the digital "Automation Mix Recorder" - an integral part until the release of Traktor Pro in October 2008 - only the digital processes were recorded and were editable, playable and could be exported as audio files.

DJ mixes could even be created gradually in several sessions. Hard drives were still relatively small at that time and a possibly several gigabyte WAV file was still an impertinence for every laptop. Here, too, NI tested new innovative ways early on, even if some ended in deadlock or later became obsolete again as technology advanced.

Friedemann Becker: "We had to drop the Automation Mix Recorder at some point because it became invisible. With each new tractor version, we had to drag along all the old effects and all old workflows, so that old recordings remained playable on newer versions and also sounded identical. This became too much effort at some point, it became unstable and was never really enjoyable to use. The first recording all the way through, no problem, but editing mixes afterwards - the real purpose of this feature - was pretty complicated. In the meantime, larger hard drives had also made their way into the laptops of the users, longer WAV recordings were no longer a problem, so we finally separated from the Automation Mix Recorder in favor of other priorities. "


The first version of Traktor DJ Studio was also available as a pure player for the PC. Some techno and trance CDs included an installer and a mixfile that could only be played with Traktor or the Traktor Player. (Image: Mijk van Dijk)

Traktor DJ Studio 2 (October 2002) - Very close to the user
Already in October 2002 Traktor DJ Studio 2 came into the stores, finally also as Mac version, together with many new features like Keylock, more loop functions, Preview Player as well as a strong Re-Design. The sync button was now big and prominent among the players.

"In the second version of October 2002, you can already see the tendency to grow from a very simple application to a relatively complicated studio project," grins Friedemann Becker while looking at the screenshot. "Then came more and more user requests and at that time Traktor has been developed very close to the user. The users expressed many ideas and wishes, which we wanted to make available. That's why Traktor got a lot of features at that time, which sometimes covered very different areas. "


Traktor DJ Studio 2 brought just a year later a wealth of new features, many inspired by the ever-growing user community (Image: courtesy of Native Instruments)

Traktor DJ Studio 2.5 (September 2003) - Beatjump and Key Control
Friedemann Becker: "Traktor DJ Studio 2.5 was rather a small update with a vertical mixer, so that the waveforms had a lot of space. They were really important for more and more people. I remember long discussions when we changed the color scheme: the users complained that they could not see "their beats" anymore. That's why when we introduced the colored waveforms, we still left the option of displaying the waveforms in their usual old yellowish hue. Incidentally, the colored waveforms are actually frequency based, while in Traktor DJ Studio 2.5 we've created tinting over other factors.

Then this variant also offered OSC (Open Sound Control), which is a kind of "high-resolution MIDI" with the disadvantage that it is not standardized. Reactor runs with OSC and the plan was, among other things, to better connect tractor and reactor. Some video softwares also use OSC. But we did not pursue this excursion, because OSC is very special. "


Traktor DJ Studio 2.5 offered for the first time the function "Beatjump" and via Key-Control also the stepless pitch change of a track (Picture courtesy of Native Instruments)

Sync Traktor pioneered digital DJing in many areas. Not only that software and hardware companies like Pioneer have successively adopted concepts from Traktor such as Beatjump and Deck Lock: Especially in the annoying discussion about the sync button Native Instruments has anticipated many battles that other companies did not have to beat later , How did you hear this discussion at NI?

"That was quite blatant", Friedemann Becker candidly admits. "But respected DJs like Chris Liebing have been very intrigued by the digital hang-up and have sided with the Sync button. This was not just a "substitute for the DJ", but would support and reinforce its possibilities. That helped a lot with the credibility aspect. Chris also suggested early on a four-channel version of Traktor. It was still the time before vinyl control and that was the hardest time for us. When Vinyl Control, Richie Hawtin and John Acquaviva came around the corner, many professional DJs finally saw the tractor as a serious alternative. "

Traktor Final Scratch (März 2004) – Scratch it!
In November 1998, the Amsterdam-based company N2IT introduced the first timecode-based digital vinyl system (DVS) at the COMDEX in Las Vegas: "Final Scratch" ran on BeOS and the hand-soldered hardware prototype was still in an aluminum can. Also in Germany, the system was seen in the episode, including the Computer Chaos Camp (CCC) 1999 in Paulshof Altlandsberg, 25 km northeast of Berlin.

There was no music on the specially pressed vinyl records, but a digital timecode signal that used a cartridge and special sound card to tell the software how fast the disk was spinning and what playhead it was at. Thus, DJ could pitch and scratch a digital piece of music and put the needle in the middle of the track, just like with an analogue record. The software did not have a friendly interface, but it worked! For the first time, music files on a computer could be controlled using timecode vinyl records .

The two Plus 8 label owners Richie Hawtin and John Acquaviva recognized the potential of this new technology and joined the Dutch developer N2IT as a shareholder. Publicly, the two star DJs were looking for partners for the necessary road-ready audio interface, had also contact with Native Instruments, but the contract was then awarded Stanton and early 2002 was presented at the NAMM Stanton Final Scratch FS 1.0. The software ran on BeOS and Linux, still came from N2IT and looked very simple: two yellow waveforms on a blue background, a browser and that's it. No faders, no buttons and no sync. The sound card was the circular "Scratch Amp", which was connected via USB to the computer.

Friedemann Becker recalls: "We had previously had discussions with Stanton about hardware, eg. If you do not even want to build a mixing controller for us. Now they came up to us and asked if we could make Tractor Final Scratch capable. That's how the first version of Traktor Final Scratch was created. But we had to reinstecken properly development work. So we developed a new time code and decoder, which provided a better performance, with the new, very robust code now fast back spins and very slow scratches were possible and the susceptibility to dust and noise was reduced. But most of all, the fact that the software was finally available for Mac and Windows computers was the breakthrough for Final Scratch. "

Final Scratch FS 1.1 first appeared in March 2004 with a tractor-typical interface for Linux and MacOS. As of FS 1.5 it was over with Linux and the software was based on MacOS and Windows XP. Keylock was also possible here: The plate could be changed in speed with unchanged pitch. But there was still no sync, here DJ was allowed by control vinyl to lend a hand.

At the time DJs were often sampled by the labels with MP3s instead of vinyl records in order to keep the promotion costs low. So many DJs already put on a mix of vinyl and CD, but DJ CD players were still frowned upon at the beginning of the new millennium and far from today's possibilities. So a system like Traktor Scratch - also thanks to the support of heavyweights like Hawtin / Acquaviva - appeared very attractive to traveling professional DJs to touring much more music than fitting into one or two record cases.

For hip-hop scratch DJs also opened up a whole new field. Finally, they no longer had to rely solely on pressed special vinyl or hard-to-scratch, short-lived dubplates, but could use any sound file from the computer via DVS. As vocal tracks of their MCs and your own created sounds. And that the software did not yet have the sync feature did not matter here. Friedemann Becker: "With the Hip Hop DJ, it is very important to be able to show the scratch skills, a tool that was not intended for that purpose, such as using a turntable as a musical instrument. Because innovation is almost counterproductive, because you do not want that the technology decreases, but would like to prove his dexterity and remain comprehensible as a scratch artist. "

If you want to know more about the theory of timecode, you will find a good description on Wikipedia . 


Traktor Final Scratch was a specially developed software for Stanton's Final Scratch. First as an independent product, Traktor offered mixing via control vinyl. (Image: with permission of Native Instruments)

Tractor DJ Studio 2.6 (November 2004)
The DJ Studio with Vinyl Control Traktor Final Scratch was still a stand-alone and independent software. In parallel, Native Instruments continued to develop the tractor DJ Studio. With version 2.6 also tractor became DVS-able. That was an important thing because it made the main tractor program, with all its powerful features, the competition for the relatively simple Final Scratch. Among other things, the Final Scratch technology became Sync enabled and it was possible to loop tracks despite vinyl control. In addition, the track no longer had to be tied to the timecode "absolutely", but also ran "relatively".

In addition, NI introduced the audio recorder with this version to be able to record mixes not only as data via a mixer recorder, but also directly as an audio file, essential for operation with control vinyl. Additional file formats like FLAC, Ogg Vorbis, AAC and WMA joined MP3, WAV and AIFF.

And finally, Conditional MIDI Mapping was the basis for a highly creative mapping scene that would make Traktor the most important software for DJ controllers in the following years. Suddenly there was a new term: Controllerism, especially launched by the US website DJtechtools and its founder Ean Golden, who offered many mappings for all sorts of impossible and impossible controller for free download.

Friedemann Becker: "Ean Golden has done a lot. I do not know if it was he who came up with the term "controllerism", but he promoted him as a new category with his website DJtechtools. Even with the DMC Championshots, Controllerism was accepted and introduced as a new category besides Turntablism. Add to that the many different mappings that could be downloaded from DJTT, as well as the overlays and ultimately the hardware developed by Ean himself. "

With the blessing of Vestax, Ean sold his own version of the VCI-400, creating the Dicer mini-controllers for Novation and the MIDI Fighter series on his own.


Tractor DJ Studio 2.6 made tractor DVS-capable. All the powerful tractor functions were now also available to vinyl DJs. (Image: with permission of Native Instruments)

Tractor 3 (September 2005) - Four decks and more
With Tractor 2, Native Instruments further expanded its DJ software: Now there were four decks, effects, and even its own on-board browser for the recently launched Beatport store, in which NI held stakes. Now the GUI was completely overloaded with features and DJ was even able to configure the user interface via the configurable header panel. And everything could be controlled either via MIDI controller or timecode vinyl.

Friedemann Becker: "In the meantime we did not find the suffix" Studio "any more, because Traktor had become mainly a stage tool, so we let him away from this version. Traktor 3 offered the highlight in the configurability of the user interface. In my opinion, this never happened again, we had so many functions and it was necessary to offer a rack in the header panel, where you could plug in different modules, so as not to completely explode the GUI. Since there were only four decks from tractor 3 onwards, the main reason is that only in 2005 did laptops have enough CPU power to process all the features of Traktor in quadruple form. Especially Key-Lock is very "expensive" in terms of CPU consumption. "

Beatport Inside
"The Beatport integration, on the other hand, was an excursion that we did not pursue after Traktor 3," Becker continues. "NI was a partner and we were very supportive to Beatport in its launch phase with our know-how. The company initially had its office in our premises. Then came the idea of ​​an embedded Beatport window in the browser. Unfortunately, concepts such as "responsive design" did not exist at the time, so Beatport constantly had to maintain two shop frontends, the one in Traktor 3 and the other on the Web. Of course, the latter was always more up-to-date and therefore the customers finally bought in the online shop. The intensity of use and the effort simply did not count for us. The idea was basically good and maybe that will happen again sometime,


Traktor 3 offered an incredibly large range of functions, with four decks and even with embedded Beatport shop, but for the price of maximum confusion. So cluttered Traktor's GUI was never again. (Image: with permission of Native Instruments)

Tractor Final Scratch 2 (November 2005) -Once once again
In the meantime, Stanton developed the Scratch Amp 2, which looked a bit like a car hi-fi amp, was connected via Firewire and released in November 2005 along with Tractor Final Scratch FS 2.0. The Firewire interface promised less latency than USB 1.0. The Scratch Amp 2 not only worked only with Final Scratch 2, but was also compatible with the then current tractor versions, eg. B. Traktor DJ Studio 3 from version 3.3. And so there was another competition for Stanton in addition to Serato: Native Instruments itself. NI had developed its own timecode (MK2), which was backwards compatible with the original Final Scratch timecode: Mk1 Control Vinyls could be used for example. B. still be used. Friedemann Becker recalls: "It came the point where we wanted to update the timecode to make it even more robust. Since this MK2 timecode was a new development and in our view did not hurt the patents of the company N2IT, we stopped the license payments. This led to a legal dispute with Stanton, at the end of a settlement and Native Instruments acquired the entire patents on timecode.

One aspect that made me personally very proud was that many of the smart minds in digital computer technology came across the tractor over time. There was Jim Mazur, the head behind Final Scratch at Stanton, who joined us in 2007 and led the Traktor Brand until 2017, and Chad Carrier, the creator behind M-Audio's DJ Software Torq, who introduced many groundbreaking features first. Chad has been a tractor product owner at NI for many years and now manages one of the machine teams. "


Tractor Final Scratch 2 came with the new Scratch Amp 2, a slightly oversized Firewire-based sound card with additional microphone input. (Image: with permission of Native Instruments)

Tractor Scratch (January 2007) - Isolated Ways
As early as January 2007, the Berlin Traktor Scratch presented, so to speak, the continuation of Traktor Final Scratch under its own flag and with its own audio interface, the Audio 8 DJ. "Finally, we finally made our own hardware," notes Friedemann Becker with recognizable satisfaction. "Before, we always had a lot of cooperation with other partners, but here we finally could realize our own ideas. Above all, of course, the Audio 8 DJ. Of course, there were already standard sound cards for Traktor, but they were not all that ideal. For a small budget, NI Traktor introduced Scratch Duo  , a two-channel version of the large software with the matching Audio 4 DJ sound card.


Traktor Scratch was his own version of Final Scratch, which Native Instruments released after the separation from Stanton. With it, the Audio 8 DJ sound card, which still does its job with many DVS DJs without complaint. (Image: with permission of Native Instruments)

Traktor Pro (October 2008) - Much in the beginning
With Traktor Pro and the more expensive DVS variant Traktor Scratch Pro Native Instruments reissued its software. The new user interface department had made the overloaded surface of Traktor 3 clearer again. Traktor Pro already looked about 10 years ago as we still know it today. In addition, the software interior was cleared out, old routines were thrown out and Traktor Pro was no longer compatible with its predecessors. Some users have bothered, but the stable engine, the new look and last but not least so small, but fine innovations such as the representation of the cover artwork reconciled the tractor community quickly again. For many DJs the display of the cover was a big hit. Finally, you could visually browse playlists, almost as when leafing through the record boxes, the top quarter of the cover was also displayed in the "Crates". Next to the waveform, the rotation position or the quality of the DVS connection was displayed. Small service updates likeTraktor Pro 1.2  brought further improvements such as a more flexible effect section, optimized time-stretching, display support for current hardware controllers and more.

Meanwhile, DJ software was the standard in the DJ Booth. The term "Serato-Face" came to DJs who stared more into their laptops than the dancefloor. In order to decouple the focus from the computer, DJs had to be able to "touch" the music while playing, but also while selecting. NI introduced the Kontrol X1, its first proprietary NI controller, with buttons and sliders for transport, hot cues, loops, browsing and effects. A small, ingenious hardcase brought the flat X1 to the same height as the turntables and the mixing desk, and from then on you could see many scratch-scratch DJs browsing the X1 through their playlists and hot cues, loops and effects.


With Traktor Pro and Scratch Pro, NI renovated the tractor range and defined the look that is still valid today. (Image: with permission of Native Instruments)

Traktor Pro S4 (October 2010) - the birth of the classic controller console
With the Kontrol S4 controller with integrated soundcard, NI finally presented an all-inclusive solution for all DJs who do not want to work with DVS. The first S4 is the best-selling tractor controller of all time and a model for many consoles of other companies. The brand new Kontrol S4 MK3 follows with its form factor in principle still the Mark 1. In the adapted Traktor software as a treat four sample decks were integrated, the precursor of the Remix Decks with up to 64 samples. These were initially only with the Kontrol S4 hardware available and that caused displeasure among the users, especially in the mapping community, like other controllers such. For example, you could have used the Novation Launchpad to control the sample decks.

Friedemann Becker asks for understanding: "Unfortunately, you are often accused of evil. At the time, this limitation was only due to the fact that adapting a feature to your own hardware or making it mappable to any MIDI controller is quite another. First of all, we wanted to do our homework and get the feature working in a controlled ecosystem before we opened it for everyone else, because then there are different quality standards. That will probably happen even more often in the future.

We had the remix decks in mind even then, but the move would have been too big at the time. The waveforms were not colored in Pro S4 yet. Overall, Pro S4 was an intermediate step that points to more, but since Traktor Pro has not changed much in the overall architecture.

The amount of new features also became less and less as more and more energy had to be invested in the maintenance and stabilization of this software on the ever-evolving operating systems.

Service is often the lion's share of such old software: It comes a new MacOS and suddenly jerk the waveforms and so on. We receive z. For example, Apple always beta versions of the new operating systems, but sometimes comes at the last update before the release is always a crucial change, so that you can only if the new operating system is really out, can say whether you are completely compatible or not. And this happens at Apple now every year, with Windows there are rather only minor updates. But that certainly keeps us breathless. "


Traktor Pro S4 for the Kontrol S4, the best-selling tractor controller of all time. (Image: with permission of Native Instruments)

Traktor Pro 2 (April 2011) - Everything is so colorful here

In Traktor Pro 2 , there were finally sample decks for all colored waveforms, the loop recorder as an intermediate step to the remix decks. Overall, Traktor was now very well-formed. What else could one "improve" now? 

Friedemann Becker: "What can still be done better is stability and efficiency, so that the software gets an ever smaller footprint to give the computer more and more air to do its job. Most stability problems with software come from the fact that the program is "knitted on edge", so that the computing time is not sufficient to calculate the audio, which has to be played in real time. In order to incorporate new features such as the STEM decks, the program had to get enough reserves, because in principle were now up to 16 stereo tracks in real time to calculate. Only through the computer development and internal optimizations it was even possible to implement so many tracks and something like the macro effects, where per unit at least three effects under the hood run. About the Buffersize the user sets yes, how many milliseconds he gives tractor time to calculate all the audio. That's the big challenge in real-time applications, unlike non-real-time programs like Photoshop. "The DVS variant Traktor Scratch Pro 2  brought with the Audio 10 Interface the update of the Audio 8 DJ sound card. For smaller money there was the two-channel version Traktor Scratch Duo 2 with the Audio 6 sound card.

 Meanwhile, Traktor had become a super-stable software, which played its audio files without complaint, even if the computer is running on the edge of the CPU load. Friedemann Becker explains: "We have installed some safety nets. The audio thread, the process in which the audio processing is calculated, has the highest priority and when it is scarce, the user interface is first lowered in priority, then sometimes the waveform shakes or the GUI hangs, but the music keeps on going. Of course it can still come to errors in the audio output, if the user has many other power-hungry programs open, then tractor can do nothing against it. Unfortunately, we have no special rights in the system. "


Traktor Pro 2 came with Sample Decks for everyone, Loop Recorder and finally colored waveforms. (Photo: Numinos)

Traktor Pro 2.5 (March 2012) - Remixes with the power of the four
With Tractor 2.5, NI upgraded the sample decks to the much more powerful remix decks. Loops from the track decks or the loop recorder could now be stored and run seamlessly in sync with the track decks, a track could be remixed on-the-fly. There were again new, matching hardware: The Kontrol F1 can fire up to 64 loops and one-shot samples. "Remix Decks and F1 are close together, because without them, the Remix Decks are difficult to operate," explains Friedemann Becker. "It always helped that we kept strictly to that number" four ". That can be four volumes, four stems, four remix cells. There is a common thread in Traktor to always work with "quadruples". "   

Traktor Pro 2.6 (November 2012) - Kontrol Z2, the best of both worlds
With "four" it also went with new hardware such as the dual-channel Battlemixer Kontrol Z2 He continued with his firmly installed Traktor Scratch certified audio card especially addressed to hip-hop DJs and four Autocue buttons available to them to connect Turntablism and Controllerism. The well-made full-featured DJ mixer with XLR outputs, separate Booth output and microphone input provides normal phono and line inputs for turntables and CDs, but turns into a convenient tractor controller with browse via USB connected laptop with tractor. Function, effects controls, hot cues and even a triple USB hub for X1, F1 or just a USB gooseneck lamp to illuminate the workplace. Still a good choice for DJs, even if they mainly play with vinyl.


The tractor Kontrol Z2 (Picture: PW)

Traktor DJ (Februar 2013) – Traktor To Go
Long awaited Native Instruments ported their digital DJ technology in February 2013 on the iPad, the app was called Traktor DJ and was soon available for iPhone and iPod Touch. DJ could now actually "touch" the music or the waveforms and serve the app with the typical gesture techniques. There was also a compact mixer with integrated sound card, which can be operated on both iOS and OSX: the Kontrol Z1.

 With the combination of the tractor DJ for iPad and the Z1, NI had a powerful and highly mobile DJ system in its portfolio that refreshed the tractor philosophy and brought it back to its source: two decks, EQ and filters, that's it. Suddenly even mobile DJing was possible, even before the Portablism hype, as DMC champion DJ Shiftee shows in this beautiful promo video on the streets of Berlin.


Traktor DJ brought tractor technology to iPad and iPhone. (Image: with permission of Native Instruments)

Traktor Pro 2.9 (November 2014) - STEMS, a completely new DJ format
With the STEM tracks  , NI has been launching a highly interesting new audio format four years ago. In an MP4 file container are four subgroups of a track, which are played like a normal stereo file, but are individually controlled by the DJ in volume, filter and effect intensity. The corresponding STEM tracks can be bought at Beatport or from own productions by the free Stem Creator be generated. Bought STEMS are mostly split into drums, bass, melodic elements and vocals and effects. This gives DJ access to individual elements of the song. Thanks to a sophisticated software compressor from the NI kit, even STEM tracks sound almost as fat as the well-mastered stereo file despite their four individual tracks. The software came together with NI's next major hardware suite , the Kontrol S8 , a lush luxury controller with two large, high-resolution color displays optimized for STEMS gaming. Later came the more compact Kontrol S5 and Kontrol D2 The latter is almost a single player or add-on to Kontrol Z2. But even with the remix deck controller Kontrol F1 can control a STEM deck well.


The Kontrol D2 is a very compact replacement for the Remix Deck control features of the large Kontrol S8 to control Traktor Pro 2.9


Four is the magic number
How did Native Instruments come up with the number of four tracks on the Stem Decks? "" It was a very strong drive that we have always had "four" and that it remains manageable from the hardware usability. Of course we were aware that you always have to make compromises, not every track can be separated into four logical stems without merging tracks. We've been talking back and forth between the numbers four, five, and six, and at the end of the day we've come to the "four" mainly because of the hardware. It was important to us that the STEM decks remain operable in a mobile hardware controller setup and that our DJ software does not drift too much in a DAW direction. In addition, such a producer did not have to reveal his individual tracks too much,

STEMS and how it goes on
How DJ works exactly with STEMS was not clear to many despite informative Bonedo crash courses, and STEM tracks are still a niche existence - loved by some, ignored by most. NI had hoped for much of the STEMS format and the format disclosed, so that other companies make STEMS playable on their devices - unfortunately so far in vain.

Friedemann Becker wonders: "It is quite paradoxical, there are a lot of DJs who find the format incredibly interesting and wonder why it is not widespread. We make an effort, we have z. For example, they also talked to Artificial Intelligence companies, who do not want to use the STEMS format, because they think and work in multiple layers and dimensions anyway as the ordinary DJ. Many DJs also say that it is actually an undiscovered gem. It's child-friendly to play with a STEM, because actually you do not have to do more than on a track. You either can not do anything at all, but you also have the opportunity to go deep. Divided into four tracks, STEM tracks are the ultimate EQ because you're not just listening to frequencies, but can isolate the sounds directly from tracks without destroying the timeline. It is a pity that there is not much content for STEMS anymore. All STEMS files produced so far are still a drop in the ocean when you look at the entire music repertoire of the world. This is even more difficult with older music, of which probably no files exist from which the STEMS would then be generated. So it's hard to make their content available to the mass of DJs in STEMS. Therefore, so far it is more of a new tool than a new format. Of course, it would be fantastic if you could divide stereo files in a Stem creator into four separate tracks, so that you can extract four stems from each track. that STEMS does not have much content anymore. All STEMS files produced so far are still a drop in the ocean when you look at the entire music repertoire of the world. This is even more difficult with older music, of which probably no files exist from which the STEMS would then be generated. So it's hard to make their content available to the mass of DJs in STEMS. Therefore, so far it is more of a new tool than a new format. Of course, it would be fantastic if you could divide stereo files in a Stem creator into four separate tracks, so that you can extract four stems from each track. that STEMS does not have much content anymore. All STEMS files produced so far are still a drop in the ocean when you look at the entire music repertoire of the world. This is even more difficult with older music, of which probably no files exist from which the STEMS would then be generated. So it's hard to make their content available to the mass of DJs in STEMS. Therefore, so far it is more of a new tool than a new format. Of course, it would be fantastic if you could divide stereo files in a Stem creator into four separate tracks, so that you can extract four stems from each track. if you look at the entire music repertoire of the world. This is even more difficult with older music, of which probably no files exist from which the STEMS would then be generated. So it's hard to make their content available to the mass of DJs in STEMS. Therefore, so far it is more of a new tool than a new format. Of course, it would be fantastic if you could divide stereo files in a Stem creator into four separate tracks, so that you can extract four stems from each track. if you look at the entire music repertoire of the world. This is even more difficult with older music, of which probably no files exist from which the STEMS would then be generated. So it's hard to make their content available to the mass of DJs in STEMS. Therefore, so far it is more of a new tool than a new format. Of course, it would be fantastic if you could divide stereo files in a Stem creator into four separate tracks, so that you can extract four stems from each track. 


With the free Stem Creator, producers can create their own stems. (Image: Mijk van Dijk)

Bonedo: Would it be technically conceivable that Traktor, like the Accusonus software Regroover , could generate four separate Stem files from each stereo music file someday in the future?  

Friedemann Becker: "I think it has to go there. This is so close and so obvious. So what is expected of neural networks today. This releases a highly complex algorithm onto the music, which then extracts individual tracks from a variety of learned criteria, and this will always be better through a continuous learning loop, guaranteed. This is all just a matter of computing power. In the case of the DJ Stems it does not even come down to a hundred percent channel separation, since one always works in the mix anyway. So if I have a little bit of whispering from the vocals in the extracted bass drum, but that is musically acceptable, then we actually have the result we need. I would not be surprised if this format is still going through a revival, if the algorithms are then so far that Traktor in the course of an analysis - similar to the Beatgrid analysis - also extracted the same with the Stems. There are quite a few companies that are working in this direction, they are more focused on vocal and drum extraction, but it's all just a matter of attitude. I'm optimistic. "


The last years of tractor 2 From now on, Traktor stayed on version 2. There were some small service updates, some with powerful features like Traktor Pro 2.11 , a small, fine four-track step sequencer for the remix decks, Ableton Link Support, HID -Integration for Pioneer CDJ-2000NXS2 and Traktor Scratch certification for Pioneers DJM-900NXS2 and Allen & Heaths XONE: PX5 brought. 

Meanwhile, Pioneer conquered the DJ Booth with the current CDJs and record box , also thanks to a major investment of over half a billion dollars, which pumped the private equity firm KKR (Kohlberg Kravis Roberts) 2015 in Pioneer DJ. Native Instruments also got fresh money in October 2017  and the first results are now presented: In April 2018, Native announced new tractor software and controllers. The time was ripe for change. 


Tractor 2.11 at the height of his possibilities: track decks, STEM decks, remix decks, all in sync. (Image: Mijk van Dijk)

In the next part of the big tractor history: Traktor Pro 3, how it came about and what's to come.


https://www.bonedo.de/artikel/einzelansicht/interview-nis-friedemann-becker-ueber-den-kontrol-s4-mk3-traktor-pro-3-und-die-zukunft-von-dvs-und-traktor.html


Interview: NIs Friedemann Becker on the Kontrol S4 MK3, Traktor Pro 3 and the future of DVS and Traktor
History and Future of Native Instruments Traktor Teil 2
von Mijk van Dijk11.12.20181 76

Tractor Product Owner Friedemann Becker explains the new tractor Pro 3 and gives an outlook on the future

Native Instruments Traktor is next to Serato the most important professional DJ software. Whether mixing only with the laptop, with DVS support or your own highly specialized controllers: Traktor has decisively shaped the image of the digital DJ, promoted and innovations such as loops, beat jump, remix decks, Stemdecks and not least the notorious sync button in introduced the DJ culture. On the occasion of the release of Traktor Pro 3 and the also brand new controllers Kontrol S4 MK3 and Kontrol S2 MK3, Bonedo met the person at NI who had been accompanying Traktor from the beginning: Traktor Product Owner Friedemann Becker.

After looking back on two decades of digital DJing  , Becker is now looking ahead, explaining how Traktor Pro 3 came to life and what else is coming.

New controller, new luck
Tractor Pro 3 is here. And it does not come alone: ​​there is a new innovative hardware controller: the Kontrol S4 MK3 with motorized jog wheels, the so-called "haptic drives", which are supposed to convey an authentic vinyl feeling. I was allowed to hand in the NI headquarters before the release hand on a Kontrol S4 MK3 with the firmware version 0.4.5.

I do not want to anticipate the Bonedo test here, but my first impressions, after I could unpack the device, not withheld, because the new tractor controller is really fun. He feels really nice and my skepticism about the motorized jogwheels was gone very quickly. They actually turn and have a lot of power behind them - magnetic force makes it possible.

The controller is not particularly heavy, but larger than its predecessors S4 and S5 and looks much more valuable. I do not necessarily share the NI penchant for materials mix between glossy and matte, but the S4 MK3 makes a solid, sober and professional impression in terms of design and feel, also because the colorful RGB pads are lightly lit. Solid quality! The new layout of the controls nods a bit in the direction of Pioneer, but after the Japanese have already copied so much from the Berliners, now may even once.


Firmware 0.4.5: This tractor Kontrol S4 MK3 prototype could not do all the tricks, but already damn many

NI has refrained from the large displays, and rightly so, because anyone who carries their laptop with them anyway can look good on it and does not necessarily need an additional mouse cinema. The now installed smaller displays, however, provide important information about the status of the track clearly and clearly where DJ needs it: right in front of the nose. A good decision.

Really much fun made me the small fine step sequencer. Presented without much fuss with version 2.11  , the step sequencer always remained slightly below the radar. For my short test mix, there were four 808 drums on the step sequencer, bass drum, snare and hi-hats, and a simple supporting beat loop was programmed in no time at all. This may be worth gold in some DJ situations. Everything else follows in the test


The Traktor-Step sequencer has been a shadowy existence so far. There is hope that these days will finally be over: thanks to the Traktor Kontrol S4 MK3 it can be integrated in a super-intuitive way

Discussions will be made that, unlike the S4 predecessors, NI has placed the pitch faders and browse functions on the right side of the decks. The left and right "players" are now identical and look like two autarkic units. Maybe a concession to CDJ jocks and turntablists who are not used to it any other way? For the Turntable Group NI with the S4 MK3 and its impressive Haptic Drive Jogwheels may have been looking for. The feel of the Wheels is closer to the Technics 1210 than some cheap DJ turntables and provides reliable "nudgen", the manual adjustment of minimal speed differences.

Who also plays handmade music like Soul and Funk with Traktor, where the beats just do not come along and therefore the Beatgrid fails, knows about the importance of reasonable jogwheels.

With the conventional wheels of the last generation, the postpitching of such tracks is often a suicide mission. The new "plates", on the other hand, are almost screaming to ride the rhythm and let the beats rub against each other. A little push, Dragging a little, that's better than any other real existing controller with the S4 MK3. But how much popularity the jogwheels will eventually find and whether they will last as long as my Wheels of Steel from 1992 (26 years!), That must show the future.

For now, predictably, Native Instruments has released an impressive controller that has everything DJ needs: decks, FX, and a drum machine. And a booth-out. And a USB hub. And a really loud headphone output thanks to the improved audio interface, which is finally synonymous in terms of output volume to offer the CDJs.


Nice thing: the tractor Kontrol S4 MK3

Inner values
The software has also been redesigned, there are mixer effects (similar to the Pioneer Color-FX), a redesigned, darker user interface and an improved timestretching and pitch-shifting algorithm, the élastiquePro V3, licensed from zplane.

So that's the promised, retreaded tractor? No, because as we reported half a year ago, the tractor is going to double-track the future . And tractor Pro 3 is not yet the retreaded tractor version, but the successor of tractor 2.11. But still the professional version, because the "new" tractor will need some more time ...


Tractor Product Owner Friedemann Becker explains the new tractor Pro 3 and gives an outlook on the future

Interview with Friedemann Becker (NI)
Friedemann Becker: "We are currently working in parallel on two different tractor versions. About a year ago we started to completely rebuild the tractor. But this is not the tractor Pro 3, which is now on the market, but it is a parallel development. This takes time and we will make this new software step by step in close cooperation with the users. That's why we will continue to maintain the current tractor Pro for several years. "

What's up with the new hardware?
Friedemann Becker: "We spent a lot of time to support the new hardware in a sensible way. The special feature of the new Kontrol S4 MK3 is the "Haptic Drive", a revolutionary new technology that did not exist in this way before. There are static jog wheels like the CDJs, there are these "turntable-like" controllers with a turntable motor and a disc with a spindle, while the haptic drive is a jogwheel with a smart motor depending on where you touch it can show completely different behavior.

Nudged out on the edge, the Haptic Drive builds up a very strong torque. If you put your hand in the middle of the jog wheel, then the haptic drive is suddenly very easy to stop, like a record on the slipmat. You can also make cue points noticeable with the engine. You feel them looking and scratching, like notches on the plate. Due to these innovations we expect a new closeness to the music, similar to a real record. The jogwheel actually turns like a turntable and due to the very high resolution of the Haptic Drives you can also beatmat very well by hand.


The Haptic Drive of the Kontrol S4 MK3 is the real sensation of the Traktor Kontrol S4 MK3 and gives the jogwheel a similar resistance as a record player engine

When the new S4 MK3 was finally brought to life, that was once again such a DVS moment for me. I had the feeling that we once again took a huge step forward in bringing the music to life directly. The confidence-inspiring effect of spinning wheels is amazing from today's perspective - you have to experience it to understand what I mean.

The revolutionary thing is that the Haptic Wheel comes very close to the turntable, with a much more compact form factor. Some DJs have already said that it is the "better DVS" because it has less wow and flutter than a turntable. The new Kontrol S4 MK3 represents a new generation of controllers, a compact but complete DJ setup with a mixer and the feel of two turntables. "

Is DVS damned to extinction now?
Friedemann Becker: "Compared to today, the situation in the club was completely different in the past: each club had a mixer and two turntables and some of them might also have CD players. The two Traktor Scratch Vinyl in the bag replaced with the laptop your whole record case. Nowadays it is almost a rarity when a club puts two turntables on the table. So I think that the time of DVS systems is coming to an end so slowly. " 


The new smaller display shows all relevant functions without much distraction

Is manual pitching a relic from the past?
Friedemann Becker: "Just recently, I talked to Chris Liebing about it and said that he is now pitching a lot more by hand. For example, when he goes on stage with Speedy J, Collabs 3000, their setups are not linked, but they sync each other by hand. But even if he plays alone on four decks, he only uses sync to initially adjust the tempi of the tracks, but still nudged after that, because he can bring very different tensions into the mix with different offsets.

It is even better, he said, if the track always wandered out easily and had to be readjusted, because then a much greater dynamic emerges in the set. In that sense I mean that manual pitching is not a relic, but belongs to the essence of DJing.

So the main feature of Traktor Pro 3 is actually the support of the Kontrol S4 MK3?
Friedemann Becker: "You can say that. There are a few other features that are interesting for the pro user. By separating Traktor Pro and the new tractor, Traktor Pro puts more emphasis on the professional user. We have completely redesigned the metering, we have made the master meter very long, we have incorporated a new more transparent and very neutral limiter that comes from machine. There is now also an indication of how strong the limiter intervenes.

We respond to the criticism of some users that tractor compared to the CDJs is not loud enough and that is actually always the wrong attitude of tractor owed, because tractor as an all-in-one system with virtually no headroom with up to 16 stereo tracks had to compete against a pure stereo device. Since we have now added a lot.

There's a new keylock algorithm that lets you pitch up to four semitones up and down without hearing anything disturbing. In addition, we have also introduced channel effects. Each channel now has eight different effects in addition to the filter. They are parameterized to be neutral in the middle, to the right a highpass like build-up is triggered, to the left it gets duller and makes it easy to get out of the way. These channel effects are already configured so you only need to turn one knob to create stunning effects. "


The Haptic Drive of the Kontrol S4 MK3 is the real sensation of the Traktor Kontrol S4 MK3

For years, one sees a dominance of Pioneer products in the DJ booth. The times when a lot of DJs with laptop and tractor hang up, seem to be over, you see everywhere only CDJ setups, which also has to do with the fact that DJs find this new standard good, only with their USB stick to Gig and you have to leave your expensive equipment at home.

Are the clubs a market from which NI is slowly bidding farewell, or are you trying - like Denon - to dock with the Pioneer biotope or establish your own biotope? 
Friedemann Becker: "When we say: Tractor is back !, we mean that it is much broader than there is only a new software. Especially through the connection to the producing DJ we have a unique selling point. In the future, Traktor will be seen more frequently in the DJ booth, in whatever way. Let yourself be surprised!


The tractor GUI got a facelift. Factual, darker, club suitable
